README.md, before:

# datasette-dashboards

> Datasette plugin to create interactive data dashboards

[![PyPI](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/datasette-dashboards.svg)](https://pypi.org/project/datasette-dashboards/)
[![CI/CD](https://github.com/rclement/datasette-dashboards/actions/workflows/ci-cd.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/rclement/datasette-dashboards/actions/workflows/ci-cd.yml)
[![Coverage Status](https://img.shields.io/codecov/c/github/rclement/datasette-dashboards)](https://codecov.io/gh/rclement/datasette-dashboards)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/github/license/rclement/datasette-dashboards)](https://github.com/rclement/datasette-dashboards/blob/master/LICENSE)

Try out a live demo at [https://datasette-dashboards-demo.vercel.app](https://datasette-dashboards-demo.vercel.app/-/dashboards)

**WARNING**: this plugin is still experimental and not ready for production.
Some breaking changes might happen between releases before reaching a stable version.
Use it at your own risks!

![Datasette Dashboards Demo](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/rclement/datasette-dashboards/master/demo/datasette-dashboards-demo.png)

## Installation

Install this plugin in the same environment as Datasette:

```bash
$ datasette install datasette-dashboards
```

## Usage

Define dashboards within `metadata.yml` / `metadata.json`:

```yaml
plugins:
  datasette-dashboards:
    my-dashboard:
      title: My Dashboard
      description: Showing some nice metrics
      layout:
        - [analysis-note, events-count]
        - [analysis-note, events-source]
      filters:
        date_start:
          name: Date Start
          type: date
          default: "2021-01-01"
        date_end:
          name: Date End
          type: date
        category:
          name: My Category
          type: select
          options: [Option 1, Option 2, Option 3]
        dynamic_category:
          name: My Dynamic Category
          type: select
          db: jobs
          query: SELECT region FROM jobs ORDER BY region ASC
      charts:
        analysis-note:
          library: markdown
          display: |-
            # Analysis notes
            > A quick rundown of events statistics and KPIs

        events-count:
          title: Total number of events
          db: jobs
          query: SELECT count(*) as count FROM events
          library: metric
          display:
            field: count
            prefix:
            suffix:

        events-source:
          title: Number of events by source
          db: jobs
          query: SELECT source, count(*) as count FROM events WHERE TRUE [[ AND date >= date(:date_start) ]] [[ AND date <= date(:date_end) ]] GROUP BY source ORDER BY count DESC
          library: vega-lite
          display:
            mark: { type: arc, tooltip: true }
            encoding:
              color: { field: source, type: nominal }
              theta: { field: count, type: quantitative }
```

A new menu entry is now available, pointing at `/-/dashboards` to access all defined dashboards.

### Properties

Dashboard properties:

| Property      | Type     | Description           |
| ------------- | -------- | --------------------- |
| `title`       | `string` | Dashboard title       |
| `description` | `string` | Dashboard description |
| `settings`    | `object` | Dashboard settings    |
| `layout`      | `array`  | Dashboard layout      |
| `filters`     | `object` | Dashboard filters     |

Dashboard settings:

| Property           | Type     | Description                                                    |
| ------------------ | -------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `allow_fullscreen` | `bool`   | Allow dashboard to be toggled in fullscreen  (default `false`) |
| `autorefresh`      | `number` | Auto-refresh timeout in minutes                                |

Dashboard filters:

| Property  | Type               | Description                                      |
| --------- | ------------------ | ------------------------------------------------ |
| `name`    | `string`           | Filter display name                              |
| `type`    | `string`           | Filter type (`text`, `date`, `number`, `select`) |
| `default` | `string`, `number` | (optional) Filter default value                  |
| `min`     | `number`           | (optional) Filter minimum value                  |
| `max`     | `number`           | (optional) Filter maximum value                  |
| `step`    | `number`           | (optional) Filter stepping value                 |
| `options` | `list`             | (optional) Select filter options list            |
| `db`      | `string`           | (optional) Dynamic select filter database        |
| `query`   | `string`           | (optional) Dynamic select filter query           |

Common chart properties for all chart types:

| Property  | Type     | Description                                                                           |
| --------- | -------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `title`   | `string` | Chart title                                                                           |
| `db`      | `string` | Database name against which to run the query                                          |
| `query`   | `string` | SQL query to run and extract data from                                                |
| `library` | `string` | One of supported libraries: `vega`, `vega-lite`, `markdown`, `metric`, `table`, `map` |
| `display` | `object` | Chart display specification (depend on the used library)                              |

To define SQL queries using dashboard filters:

```sql
SELECT * FROM mytable [[ WHERE col >= :my_filter ]]
```

```sql
SELECT * FROM mytable WHERE TRUE [[ AND col1 = :my_filter_1 ]] [[ AND col2 = :my_filter_2 ]]
```

**Important notes:**

- When a `select` filter has more than 100 options, the dropdown list will be automatically converted to a text filter with autocompletion

#### Vega properties

Available configuration for `vega` charts:

| Property  | Type     | Description               |
| --------- | -------- | ------------------------- |
| `library` | `string` | Must be set to `vega`     |
| `display` | `object` | Vega specification object |

Notes about the `display` property:

- Requires a valid [Vega specification object](https://vega.github.io/vega/docs/)
- Some fields are pre-defined: `$schema`, `description`, `autosize`, `data`, `signals`
- All fields are passed along as-is (overriding pre-defined fields if any)
- Only `mark` and `encoding` fields are required as the bare-minimum

#### Vega-Lite properties

Available configuration for `vega-lite` charts:

| Property  | Type     | Description                |
| --------- | -------- | -------------------------- |
| `library` | `string` | Must be set to `vega-lite` |
| `display` | `object` | Vega specification object  |

Notes about the `display` property:

- Requires a valid [Vega-Lite specification object](https://vega.github.io/vega-lite/docs/)
- Some fields are pre-defined: `$schema`, `description`, `width`, `view`, `config`, `data`
- All fields are passed along as-is (overriding pre-defined fields if any)
- Only `mark` and `encoding` fields are required as the bare-minimum

#### Markdown properties

Available configuration for `markdown` chart:

| Property  | Type     | Description                                       |
| --------- | -------- | ------------------------------------------------- |
| `library` | `string` | Must be set to `markdown`                         |
| `display` | `string` | Multi-line string containing the Markdown content |

Note :

- Some common properties do not apply and can be omitted: `title`, `db`, `query`
- Markdown rendering is done by [`datasette-render-markdown`](https://datasette.io/plugins/datasette-render-markdown)
- To configure Markdown rendering, extensions can be enabled in [metadata](https://datasette.io/plugins/datasette-render-markdown#user-content-markdown-extensions)

#### Metric properties

Available configuration for `metric` chart:

| Property         | Type     | Description                               |
| ---------------- | -------- | ----------------------------------------- |
| `library`        | `string` | Must be set to `metric`                   |
| `display.field`  | `string` | Numerical field to be displayed as metric |
| `display.prefix` | `string` | Prefix to be displayed before metric      |
| `display.suffix` | `string` | Prefix to be displayed after metric       |

Note:

- The `display.field` must reference a single-numerical value from the SQL query
  (e.g. numerical `number` field in `SELECT count(*) as number FROM events`)

#### Table properties

There is no required configured in `display`, so you can either ignored or
leave it empty for table charts.

Some advice for a nice table chart:

- Set proper column names in the `SELECT` clause
- Limit the number of columns in the `SELECT` clause
- Limit the number of rows with the `LIMIT` clause
- Order the rows explicitely with the `ORDER BY` clause
- Use SQLite string concatenation operator (`||`) to format column data (for instance to include HTML markup!)

#### Map properties

Available configuration for `map` chart:

| Property                    | Type      | Description                                                                         |
| --------------------------- | --------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `library`                   | `string`  | Must be set to `map`                                                                |
| `display.latitude_column`   | `string`  | Name of the latitude column (default: `latitude`)                                   |
| `display.longitude_column`  | `string`  | Name of the latitude column (default: `longitude`)                                  |
| `display.show_latlng_popup` | `boolean` | Whether or not to display latitude and longitude values in popup (default: `false`) |

**Warning**: do not try to load more than a thousand rows for a map at the risk of
slugginess and being unreadable. Make sensible use of the `LIMIT` clause to reduce
the number of items to display on the map.

### Dashboard layout

The default dashboard layout will present two charts per row (one per row on mobile).
To make use of custom dashboard layout using [CSS Grid Layout](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_Grid_Layout),
define the `layout` array property as a grid / matrix:

- Each entry represents a row of charts
- Each column is referring a chart by its property name
- An empty slot in the grid can be specified using the `.` (_full stop_) placeholder

**WARNINGS**:
- All rows must specify the same number of columns
- All charts must be placed somewhere on the custom layout

Here is a simple 2x3 grid example with 4 different charts:

```yaml
layout:
  - [chart1, chart2, chart3]
  - [chart1, chart4, chart4]
```

Here is a more subtle example involving an empty spot at the end of the second row:

```yaml
layout:
  - [chart1, chart2, chart3]
  - [chart1, chart4, .]
```

### Embedding dashboards and charts

Dashboards can be embedded within an HTML page using an `iframe` element:

```html
<iframe
  src="/-/dashboards/my-dashboard/embed?start_date=2023-01-01&end_date=2023-12-31"
  frameborder="0"
  width="100%"
  height="600"
  allowtransparency
>
</iframe>
```

Same goes for charts:

```html
<iframe
  src="/-/dashboards/my-dashboard/my-chart/embed?start_date=2023-01-01&end_date=2023-12-31"
  frameborder="0"
  width="100%"
  height="600"
  allowtransparency
>
</iframe>
```

## Development

To set up this plugin locally, first checkout the code.
Then create a new virtual environment and the required dependencies:

```bash
poetry install
poetry shell
```

To run the QA suite:

```bash
black --check datasette_dashboards tests
flake8 datasette_dashboards tests
mypy datasette_dashboards tests
pytest -v --cov=datasette_dashboards --cov=tests --cov-branch --cov-report=term-missing tests
```

## Updating JS dependencies

External JS dependencies are tracked and bundled using NPM and `package.json` (`package-lock.json` is not needed here):

```bash
npm install --no-package-lock
```

## Demo

With the developmnent environment setup, you can run the demo locally:

```bash
datasette \
  --metadata demo/metadata.yml \
  --template-dir demo/templates \
  demo/jobs.db
```

## License

Licensed under Apache License, Version 2.0

Copyright (c) 2021 - present Romain Clement

Commit message:

Support markdown configuration in markdown chart definition
Fixes #288

README.md, after:

# datasette-dashboards

> Datasette plugin to create interactive data dashboards

[![PyPI](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/datasette-dashboards.svg)](https://pypi.org/project/datasette-dashboards/)
[![CI/CD](https://github.com/rclement/datasette-dashboards/actions/workflows/ci-cd.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/rclement/datasette-dashboards/actions/workflows/ci-cd.yml)
[![Coverage Status](https://img.shields.io/codecov/c/github/rclement/datasette-dashboards)](https://codecov.io/gh/rclement/datasette-dashboards)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/github/license/rclement/datasette-dashboards)](https://github.com/rclement/datasette-dashboards/blob/master/LICENSE)

Try out a live demo at [https://datasette-dashboards-demo.vercel.app](https://datasette-dashboards-demo.vercel.app/-/dashboards)

**WARNING**: this plugin is still experimental and not ready for production.
Some breaking changes might happen between releases before reaching a stable version.
Use it at your own risks!

![Datasette Dashboards Demo](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/rclement/datasette-dashboards/master/demo/datasette-dashboards-demo.png)

## Installation

Install this plugin in the same environment as Datasette:

```bash
$ datasette install datasette-dashboards
```

## Usage

Define dashboards within `metadata.yml` / `metadata.json`:

```yaml
plugins:
  datasette-dashboards:
    my-dashboard:
      title: My Dashboard
      description: Showing some nice metrics
      layout:
        - [analysis-note, events-count]
        - [analysis-note, events-source]
      filters:
        date_start:
          name: Date Start
          type: date
          default: "2021-01-01"
        date_end:
          name: Date End
          type: date
        category:
          name: My Category
          type: select
          options: [Option 1, Option 2, Option 3]
        dynamic_category:
          name: My Dynamic Category
          type: select
          db: jobs
          query: SELECT region FROM jobs ORDER BY region ASC
      charts:
        analysis-note:
          library: markdown
          settings:
            extensions:
              - attr_list
            extra_attrs:
              h1:
                - name
          display: |-
            # Analysis notes {: name="notes" }
            > A quick rundown of events statistics and KPIs

        events-count:
          title: Total number of events
          db: jobs
          query: SELECT count(*) as count FROM events
          library: metric
          display:
            field: count
            prefix:
            suffix:

        events-source:
          title: Number of events by source
          db: jobs
          query: SELECT source, count(*) as count FROM events WHERE TRUE [[ AND date >= date(:date_start) ]] [[ AND date <= date(:date_end) ]] GROUP BY source ORDER BY count DESC
          library: vega-lite
          display:
            mark: { type: arc, tooltip: true }
            encoding:
              color: { field: source, type: nominal }
              theta: { field: count, type: quantitative }
```

A new menu entry is now available, pointing at `/-/dashboards` to access all defined dashboards.

### Properties

Dashboard properties:

| Property      | Type     | Description           |
| ------------- | -------- | --------------------- |
| `title`       | `string` | Dashboard title       |
| `description` | `string` | Dashboard description |
| `settings`    | `object` | Dashboard settings    |
| `layout`      | `array`  | Dashboard layout      |
| `filters`     | `object` | Dashboard filters     |

Dashboard settings:

| Property           | Type     | Description                                                    |
| ------------------ | -------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `allow_fullscreen` | `bool`   | Allow dashboard to be toggled in fullscreen  (default `false`) |
| `autorefresh`      | `number` | Auto-refresh timeout in minutes                                |

Dashboard filters:

| Property  | Type               | Description                                      |
| --------- | ------------------ | ------------------------------------------------ |
| `name`    | `string`           | Filter display name                              |
| `type`    | `string`           | Filter type (`text`, `date`, `number`, `select`) |
| `default` | `string`, `number` | (optional) Filter default value                  |
| `min`     | `number`           | (optional) Filter minimum value                  |
| `max`     | `number`           | (optional) Filter maximum value                  |
| `step`    | `number`           | (optional) Filter stepping value                 |
| `options` | `list`             | (optional) Select filter options list            |
| `db`      | `string`           | (optional) Dynamic select filter database        |
| `query`   | `string`           | (optional) Dynamic select filter query           |

Common chart properties for all chart types:

| Property  | Type     | Description                                                                           |
| --------- | -------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `title`   | `string` | Chart title                                                                           |
| `db`      | `string` | Database name against which to run the query                                          |
| `query`   | `string` | SQL query to run and extract data from                                                |
| `library` | `string` | One of supported libraries: `vega`, `vega-lite`, `markdown`, `metric`, `table`, `map` |
| `display` | `object` | Chart display specification (depend on the used library)                              |

To define SQL queries using dashboard filters:

```sql
SELECT * FROM mytable [[ WHERE col >= :my_filter ]]
```

```sql
SELECT * FROM mytable WHERE TRUE [[ AND col1 = :my_filter_1 ]] [[ AND col2 = :my_filter_2 ]]
```

**Important notes:**

- When a `select` filter has more than 100 options, the dropdown list will be automatically converted to a text filter with autocompletion

#### Vega properties

Available configuration for `vega` charts:

| Property  | Type     | Description               |
| --------- | -------- | ------------------------- |
| `library` | `string` | Must be set to `vega`     |
| `display` | `object` | Vega specification object |

Notes about the `display` property:

- Requires a valid [Vega specification object](https://vega.github.io/vega/docs/)
- Some fields are pre-defined: `$schema`, `description`, `autosize`, `data`, `signals`
- All fields are passed along as-is (overriding pre-defined fields if any)
- Only `mark` and `encoding` fields are required as the bare-minimum

#### Vega-Lite properties

Available configuration for `vega-lite` charts:

| Property  | Type     | Description                |
| --------- | -------- | -------------------------- |
| `library` | `string` | Must be set to `vega-lite` |
| `display` | `object` | Vega specification object  |

Notes about the `display` property:

- Requires a valid [Vega-Lite specification object](https://vega.github.io/vega-lite/docs/)
- Some fields are pre-defined: `$schema`, `description`, `width`, `view`, `config`, `data`
- All fields are passed along as-is (overriding pre-defined fields if any)
- Only `mark` and `encoding` fields are required as the bare-minimum

#### Markdown properties

Available configuration for `markdown` chart:

| Property   | Type     | Description                                       |
| ---------- | -------- | ------------------------------------------------- |
| `library`  | `string` | Must be set to `markdown`                         |
| `display`  | `string` | Multi-line string containing the Markdown content |
| `settings` | `object` | Markdown settings                                 |

Note :

- Some common properties do not apply and can be omitted: `title`, `db`, `query`
- Markdown rendering is done by [`datasette-render-markdown`](https://datasette.io/plugins/datasette-render-markdown)
- To configure Markdown rendering, use `settings`.

##### Markdown settings

Available configuration for Markdown rendering:

| Property      | Type     | Description                                          |
| ------------- | -------- | ---------------------------------------------------- |
| `extensions`  | `array`  | List of extension entry points to enable             |
| `extra_tags`  | `array`  | List of extra tags to allow                          |
| `extra_attrs` | `object` | Mapping of tags to extra attributes allowed for them |

Note :

- These arguments are passed to the [`render_markdown()` function](https://github.com/simonw/datasette-render-markdown/blob/main/README.md#markdown-in-templates).
- The `extra_tags` and `extra_attrs` are passed to [Bleach](https://bleach.readthedocs.io/).
  + `extra_attrs` is indeed required to be given [as a dict](https://bleach.readthedocs.io/en/latest/clean.html#as-a-dict).

#### Metric properties

Available configuration for `metric` chart:

| Property         | Type     | Description                               |
| ---------------- | -------- | ----------------------------------------- |
| `library`        | `string` | Must be set to `metric`                   |
| `display.field`  | `string` | Numerical field to be displayed as metric |
| `display.prefix` | `string` | Prefix to be displayed before metric      |
| `display.suffix` | `string` | Prefix to be displayed after metric       |

Note:

- The `display.field` must reference a single-numerical value from the SQL query
  (e.g. numerical `number` field in `SELECT count(*) as number FROM events`)

#### Table properties

There is no required configured in `display`, so you can either ignored or
leave it empty for table charts.

Some advice for a nice table chart:

- Set proper column names in the `SELECT` clause
- Limit the number of columns in the `SELECT` clause
- Limit the number of rows with the `LIMIT` clause
- Order the rows explicitely with the `ORDER BY` clause
- Use SQLite string concatenation operator (`||`) to format column data (for instance to include HTML markup!)

#### Map properties

Available configuration for `map` chart:

| Property                    | Type      | Description                                                                         |
| --------------------------- | --------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `library`                   | `string`  | Must be set to `map`                                                                |
| `display.latitude_column`   | `string`  | Name of the latitude column (default: `latitude`)                                   |
| `display.longitude_column`  | `string`  | Name of the latitude column (default: `longitude`)                                  |
| `display.show_latlng_popup` | `boolean` | Whether or not to display latitude and longitude values in popup (default: `false`) |

**Warning**: do not try to load more than a thousand rows for a map at the risk of
slugginess and being unreadable. Make sensible use of the `LIMIT` clause to reduce
the number of items to display on the map.

### Dashboard layout

The default dashboard layout will present two charts per row (one per row on mobile).
To make use of custom dashboard layout using [CSS Grid Layout](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_Grid_Layout),
define the `layout` array property as a grid / matrix:

- Each entry represents a row of charts
- Each column is referring a chart by its property name
- An empty slot in the grid can be specified using the `.` (_full stop_) placeholder

**WARNINGS**:
- All rows must specify the same number of columns
- All charts must be placed somewhere on the custom layout

Here is a simple 2x3 grid example with 4 different charts:

```yaml
layout:
  - [chart1, chart2, chart3]
  - [chart1, chart4, chart4]
```

Here is a more subtle example involving an empty spot at the end of the second row:

```yaml
layout:
  - [chart1, chart2, chart3]
  - [chart1, chart4, .]
```

### Embedding dashboards and charts

Dashboards can be embedded within an HTML page using an `iframe` element:

```html
<iframe
  src="/-/dashboards/my-dashboard/embed?start_date=2023-01-01&end_date=2023-12-31"
  frameborder="0"
  width="100%"
  height="600"
  allowtransparency
>
</iframe>
```

Same goes for charts:

```html
<iframe
  src="/-/dashboards/my-dashboard/my-chart/embed?start_date=2023-01-01&end_date=2023-12-31"
  frameborder="0"
  width="100%"
  height="600"
  allowtransparency
>
</iframe>
```

## Development

To set up this plugin locally, first checkout the code.
Then create a new virtual environment and the required dependencies:

```bash
poetry install
poetry shell
```

To run the QA suite:

```bash
black --check datasette_dashboards tests
flake8 datasette_dashboards tests
mypy datasette_dashboards tests
pytest -v --cov=datasette_dashboards --cov=tests --cov-branch --cov-report=term-missing tests
```

## Updating JS dependencies

External JS dependencies are tracked and bundled using NPM and `package.json` (`package-lock.json` is not needed here):

```bash
npm install --no-package-lock
```

## Demo

With the developmnent environment setup, you can run the demo locally:

```bash
datasette \
  --metadata demo/metadata.yml \
  --template-dir demo/templates \
  demo/jobs.db
```

## License

Licensed under Apache License, Version 2.0

Copyright (c) 2021 - present Romain Clement
